We theorized that from the perspective of U.S. Black Americans, a connection to Black ancestryîand the historical hardship associated with that ancestryîplays an important role in racial categorization. We found support for this across six studies. In Studies 1Å3, participants categorized targets with Black ancestry and White experiences or targets with White ancestry and Black experiences. U.S. Black Americansí (more than non-Black Americansí) racial categorizations were influenced by Black ancestry (more than by White ancestry). In Study 4, we replicated this effect under extreme conditions (e.g., even when targets had Black ancestry and were phenotypically, socially, culturally, self-identified, and advantaged as White for eighty years, U.S. Black Americans categorized them as Black). In Study 5, U.S. Black Americans were more likely than U.S. White Americans to associate their racial ancestry with hardship, and individual differences in those associations predicted the extent to which U.S. Black Americans categorized the target with Black ancestry and White experiences as Black. In Study 6, participants categorized a target with Black ancestry and ancestral hardship (i.e., their ancestors were kidnapped from Africa and experienced slavery) or a target with Black ancestry and ancestral success (i.e., their ancestors immigrated from Africa and experienced upward mobility). U.S. Black Americans (unlike U.S. White Americans) were more identified with the target with ancestral hardship. Collectively, our research suggests that from the perspective of U.S. Black Americans, the collective Black experiences of the past continue to shape the Black collective of the present. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)The rise of social media has led to unprecedented opportunities for individuals to share, or express, their attitudes on social and political issues. What factors affect whether individuals choose to share? This research identifies a novel determinant of attitude sharingîsupport-oppose framing, defined as whether individuals think of their own attitude in terms of what they support or what they oppose. Support-oppose framing is distinct from attitude valence, as the same attitude can be framed in terms of support (e.g., I support that this policy is bad) or opposition (e.g., I oppose that this policy is good). Seven experiments, two correlational studies, and one field study provide evidence for a support-oppose framing effect, whereby individuals are more likely to share attitudes framed in terms of positions they support rather than positions they oppose. This effect occurs via two pathways. In the first, support-framed attitudes are viewed as more value expressive, which facilitates greater attitude sharing. In the second, support-framed attitudes are believed to promote more positive impressions, which also leads to greater sharing. This effect is attenuated when individualsí typical impression-management goals are relaxed. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Trust is a key ingredient in decision making, as it allows us to rely on the information we receive. Although trust is usually viewed as a positive element of decision making, we suggest that its effects on memory are costly rather than beneficial. Across nine studies using three different manipulations of trust and distrust and three different memory paradigms, we find that trust reduces memory performance as compared with distrust. In Study 1, trust leads to higher acceptance rates of misinformation. Studies 2a and 2b demonstrate that participants in a distrust and a control condition perform better at a memory-recognition task than participants in a trust condition. Studies 3a and 3b show that trust also reduces free recall of memory content. Examining the underlying mechanism, we find that reduced memory performance in a state of trust is caused by an increased perception of similarities between items that are to be memorized. Following a causal chain design, Study 4 shows that trust increases the sensitivity to similarities as compared with distrust and a control condition, and Study 5 shows that a processing focus on similarities reduces memory accuracy. Studies 6 and 7 create circumstances that either leave the proposed mediator free to vary or interrupt it via the induction of a similarity-focus (Study 6) or a difference-focus (Study 7). The disadvantage of trust is only present if the mediating processing focus can freely operate. Overall, these studies show that trust impairs memory performance due to an increased perception of similarities between memory content. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)People seek and receive support from friends through self-disclosure. However, when self-disclosures reveal personal insecurities, do people rely on friends as an audience as they normally do? This research demonstrates that they do not. Five preregistered studies show that disclosers exhibit a weaker preference for friends as an audience when disclosures involve revealing personal insecurities than when they involve revealing other neutral or negative personal information. This effect is observed despite that the only alternative audience available to disclosers in these studies is a stranger. We theorize that such an effect occurs because disclosers anticipate stronger pain associated with being reminded of disclosed contents when their disclosures involve personal insecurities than other types of information and, thus, wish to avoid such reminders from happening. Our findings support this theorizing: (a) Disclosersí weaker preference for friends as an audience for insecurity-provoking (vs. noninsecurity-provoking) disclosure is mediated by how painful they anticipate reminders of disclosed contents to be and (b) disclosersí preference for a particular audience is diminished when the perceived likelihood of disclosed-content reminders associated with that audience is enhanced. An additional preregistered exploratory content-analysis study shows that when disclosing personal insecurities, people disclose less and are less intimate in what they disclose when they imagine a friend (vs. a stranger) as an audience. Altogether, disclosers are ironically found to open up less to friends about personal insecuritiesîself-aspects that may particularly benefit from friendsí supportîthan about other topics, due to their avoidance of potentially painful disclosed-content reminders. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Having close relationships with outgroup members is an especially powerful form of intergroup contact that can reduce prejudice. Rather than examine the consequences of forming close outgroup relationships, which has previously been studied as part of intergroup contact theory, we examine how outgroup relationshipsîrelative to ingroup relationshipsîform in the first place. We collected 7 years of data from Jewish Israeli and Palestinian teenagers attending a 3-week summer camp at Seeds of Peace, one of the largest conflict transformation programs in the world. We tested how being assigned to share an activity group (e.g., bunk, table, dialogue group) influenced relationship formation among outgroup pairs (Jewish IsraeliÅPalestinian) compared with ingroup pairs (IsraeliÅIsraeli, PalestinianÅPalestinian). Existing research offers competing theories for whether propinquity is more impactful for the formation of ingroup or outgroup relationships; here, we found propinquity was significantly more impactful for outgroup relationships. Whereas 2 ingroup participants were 4.46 times more likely to become close if they were in the same versus different bunk, for example, 2 outgroup participants were 11.72 times more likely to become close. We propose that sharing an activity group is especially powerful for more dissimilar dyads because people are less likely to spontaneously engage with outgroup members in ways that promote relationships. Thus, structured, meaningful engagement can counteract homophily. Furthermore, in this setting, propinquity proved to be an even better predictor of outgroup (vs. ingroup) relationship formation than that pairís initial outgroup attitudes. We discuss theoretical and practical implications for intergroup processes and relationship formation. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Although trust plays a pivotal role in many aspects of life, very little is known about the manifestation of trust and distrust in everyday life. In this work, we integrated several prior approaches to trust and investigated the prevalence and key determinants of trust (vs. distrust) in peopleís natural environments, using preregistered experience-sampling methodology. Across more than 4,500 social interactions from a heterogeneous sample of 427 participants, results showed high average levels of trust, but also considerable variability in trust across contexts. This variability was attributable to aspects of trustee perception, social distance, as well as 3 key dimensions of situational interdependence: conflict of interests, information (un)certainty, and power imbalance. At the dispositional level, average everyday trust was shaped by general trust, moral identity, and zero-sum beliefs. The social scope of most trust-related traits, however, was moderated by social distance: Whereas moral identity buffered against distrusting distant targets, high general distrust and low social value orientation amplified trust differences between close vs. distant others. Furthermore, a laboratory-based trust game predicted everyday trust only with regard to more distant but not close interaction partners. Finally, everyday trust was linked to self-disclosure and to cooperation, particularly in situations of high conflict between interaction partnersí interests. We conclude that trust can be conceptualized as a relational hub that interconnects the social perception of the trustee, the relational closeness between trustor and trustee, key structural features of situational interdependence, and behavioral response options such as self-disclosure. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Reciprocity implies equality in the giving and receiving of benefits. However, we find that reciprocity does not generate equal benefits, in terms of social status. Instead, across 7 studies (N = 3,426), observers conferred more status to individuals who initiated (i.e., initiators) than individuals who reciprocated (i.e., reciprocators) identical prosocial acts. Further, choosing not to reciprocate a prosocial act led to a more severe status penalty than choosing not to initiate a prosocial act. We find this discounting of reciprocity is driven by perceived obligationîobservers view reciprocators as acting under constraint. When reciprocation appears less obligatory (e.g., given indirectly, or privately), the status discount is mitigated. Finally, we show that the discounting of a reciprocal act can be enduringîreciprocators still received less status after 2 successive, counterbalanced rounds of exchange. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Music is a universal phenomenon that has existed in every known culture around the world. It plays a prominent role in society by shaping sociocultural interactions between groups and individuals, and by influencing their emotional and intellectual life. Here, we provide evidence for a new theory on musical preferences. Across three studies we show that people prefer the music of artists who have publicly observable personalities (ØpersonasÆ) similar to their own personality traits (the Øself-congruity effect of musicÆ). Study 1 (Nò= 6,279) and Study 2 (Nò= 75,296) show that the public personality of artists correlates with the personality of their listeners. Study 3 (Nò= 4,995) builds on this by showing that the fit between the personality of the listener and the artist predicts musical preferences incremental to the fit for gender, age, and even the audio features of music. Our findings are largely consistent across two methodological approaches to operationalizing an artistís public personality: (a) the public personality as reported by the artistís fans, and (b) the public personality as predicted by machine learning on the basis of the artistís lyrics. We discuss the importance of the self-congruity effect of music in the context of group-level process theories and adaptionist accounts of music. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Reputations are critical in human social life: they allow people to share and act on information about one another, even when they have never met. Reputations can be conceptualized as information about a target person that is stored in networks of perceivers and transmitted through either direct interaction or hearsay. We present a novel paradigm that integrates the network approach with interpersonal perception research. We apply that paradigm to study the consensus, accuracy, positivity bias, and consequences of personality trait information in hearsay-based reputations. In 2 preregistered studies (Nò= 260 and 369), we created naturalistic micronetworks in the lab in which participants interacted and got to know one another, then later described each other to na•ve third parties. Across studies, we use the extended Social Accuracy Model (Wessels, Zimmermann, Biesanz, & Leising, 2020) and an extension of the domain-wise correlational approach (Kenny, 1994). Hearsay-based reputations are about as positively biased as direct reputations. They showed strong consensus (agreement) with direct reputations and modest accuracy, suggesting that they can consolidate around an inaccurate representation. Perceiversí extraversion was associated with more biased hearsay reputations. Experimentally manipulating the context of the hearsay exchange had no detectable impact on hearsay consensus or accuracy. Hearsay reputations were consequential, affecting the extent to which perceivers thought targets would be good leaders or friends. These results provide initial insights into reputation networks and suggest several important future directions for the network approach to reputations. We also present open materials and data analysis software for others to extend the reputations-as-networks approach. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Gender-equality paradoxes (GEPs) posit that gender gaps in math self-concepts (MSCs) are largerînot smallerîin countries with greater gender equality. These paradoxical results suggest that efforts to improve gender equality might be counterproductive. However, we show that this currently popular explanation of gender differences is an illusory, epi-phenomenon (485,490 students, 18,292 schools, 68 countries/regions). Between-country (absolute) measures of gender equality are confounded with achievement and socioeconomic-status; tiny GEPs disappear when controlling achievement and socioeconomic-status. Critically, even without controls GEPs are not supported when using true gender-gap measuresîwithin-country (relative) female-male differences, that hold many confounds constant. This absolute/relative-gap distinction is more important than the composite/domain-specific distinction for understanding why even tiny GEPs are illusory. Recent developments in academic self-concept theory are relevant to GEPs and gender differences, but also explain other, related paradoxes. The big-fish little pond effect posits that attending schools with high school-average math achievements leads to lower MSCs. Extending this theoretical model to the country-level, we show that countries with high country-average math achievements also have lower MSCs. Dimensional comparison theory predicts that MSCs are positively predicted by math achievements but negatively predicted by verbal achievements. Extending this theoretical model, we show that girlsí low MSCs are due more to girlsí high verbal achievements that detract from their MSCs than to their low math achievements. In support of the pan-human wide generalizability of our findings, our cross-national results generalize over 68 country/regions as well as multiple math self-belief constructs (self-efficacy, anxiety, interest, utility, future plans) and multiple gender-equality measures. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)People perceive similarity between their own personality characteristics and the personality characteristics of others. This association has sometimes been labeled Øassumed similarity,Æ reflecting the interpretation that it is a cognitive bias. Another possibility, however, is an interpersonal path to perceived similarity: personality traits that are manifested in behavior may elicit similar or dissimilar behavior from others, and people form perceptions based on what they have elicited. Drawing on theories of interpersonal perception and interpersonal theory, we proposed and tested for evidence of suchòperceiver-elicited similarityòeffects, as well as trait and state assumed similarity. Previously unacquainted participants (Nò= 322) completed personality assessments, interacted in dyads the next day, and then reported perceptions of each otherís personalities. The results showed broad support for the expression and accurate perceptions of most Big Five domains and facets. The preregistered directional hypotheses for behavior elicitation and perceiver-elicited similarity were supported for 3 of 5 traits. Participants interpersonally elicited and then accurately perceived similarity in sociability and openness, and dissimilarity in assertiveness. We also found evidence for assumed similarity for agreeableness and energy level, but participants did not elicit similar behavior from their partners for those traits. We discuss implications for treating perceived similarity as a dynamic, multicomponent phenomenon, and the possibility that assumed similarity emerges from the repeated experience of interpersonally elicited and perceived similarity. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Peopleís beliefs about how other people perceive their personality tend to be fairly accurate, but how does accuracy arise? The current research answers this question by testing three potential sources of meta-accuracy: the person forming the metaperception (i.e., the metaperceiver), the person forming a judgment about the metaperceiver (i.e., the perceiver), and the unique relationship between the two individuals (i.e., the dyad). In three studies, participants interacted with new acquaintances one-on-one in a platonic (Nò= 547) or dating setting (Nò= 378), or in a platonic group setting over time (Time 1,òNò= 242; Time 2,òNò= 191). Metaperceivers tended to have the most robust influence on meta-accuracy, but perceivers and especially dyads influenced accuracy as well. This suggests there are ØgoodÆ metaperceivers, perceivers, and dyads of meta-accuracy and that a more complete understanding of meta-accuracy must consider both members of an interaction. As a first step in understanding how both individuals influence accuracy, we tested the role of self-perception, specifically if some metaperceivers, perceivers, or dyads fostered accuracy because metaperceivers happened to be seen as they saw themselves. Perceivers largely fostered accuracy by seeing metaperceivers as they saw themselves but metaperceivers and dyads mostly fostered accuracy by other means. Potential contextual effects are discussed. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Politics and its controversies have permeated everyday life, but the daily impact of politics on the general public is largely unknown. Here, we apply an affective science framework to understand how the public experiences daily politics in a two-part examination. We first used longitudinal, daily diary methods to track two samples of U.S. participants as they experienced daily political events across 2 weeks (Study 1:òNò= 198, observations = 2,167) and 3 weeks (Study 2:òNò= 811, observations = 12,790) to explore how these events permeated peopleís lives and how people coped with that influence. In both diary studies, daily political events consistently not only evoked negative emotions, which corresponded to worse psychological and physical well-being, but also greater motivation to take political action (e.g., volunteer, protest) aimed at changing the political system that evoked these emotions in the first place. Understandably, people frequently tried to regulate their politics-induced emotions, and regulating these emotions using effective cognitive strategies (reappraisal and distraction) predicted greater well-being, but also weaker motivation to take action. Although people protected themselves from the emotional impact of politics, frequently used regulation strategies came with a trade-off between well-being and action. Second, we conducted experimental studies where we manipulated exposure to day-to-day politics (Study 3,òNò= 922), and the use of various emotion regulation strategies in response (Study 4,òNò= 1,277), and found causal support for the central findings of Studies 1Å2. Overall, this research highlights how politics can be a chronic stressor in peopleís daily lives, underscoring the far-reaching influence politicians have beyond the formal powers endowed unto them. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)In recent years, much of the American public has venerated military veterans as heroes. Despite overwhelmingly positive public attitudes toward veterans, veterans have experienced higher rates of unemployment and underemployment than their nonveteran peers. The current research leverages theory and research on positive stereotypes to shed light on this seeming inconsistency between the heroization of veterans and their heightened rates of unemployment and underemployment. We conceptualize the hero label as a pervasive positive stereotype, and we employ complementary methods and designs (correlational, quasi-experimental, experimental, and mediational) to investigate the consequences and implications of attaching this label to military veterans. We then extend our theorizing to other heroized groups (e.g., firefighters, paramedics, teachers, and social workers). The results across studies suggest that heroization leads the American public to funnel heroized individuals and groups into a limited set of lower paying jobs, organizations, and careers associated with selflessness. This research not only offers insights into an important real-world problem but also offers a first experimental investigation of the consequences and implications of labeling a group of people as heroes. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)The question of whether individuals are more prone to trust or to mistrust has increasingly interested economists and psychologists in recent years. To investigate whether people have an initial response tendency to trust versus mistrust, we developed a novel paradigmîthe Dominant Behavior Measure (DBM). Capitalizing on decades of meticulous research in basic cognitive psychology (i.e., bilingual studies, Stroop paradigm), we designed a task to measure the dominance of reactions in the social realm. Participants engaged in a series of trust games that involved switching between trusting and mistrusting two trustworthy counterparts and two untrustworthy counterparts, identified by color (while ignoring a distractor name) or by name (when no color was presented). Like other dominant response tendencies (e.g., participantís first language), trust is faster, harder to switch to, and more interfering/facilitating than mistrust (Experiments 1Å7). The dominance of trust holds in various social contextsîcertainty of counterpartís un/trustworthiness (Experiments 4a?4c), unfamiliar counterparts (Experiments 5 and 6), counterparts from oneís in-group versus out-group (Experiment 6), and negative framing of trust (Experiment 7)îshowing that the dominant tendency to trust people (but not nonsocial objects, Experiment 8) is context-independent and robust. We rule out alternative explanations such as asymmetric payoff (Experiments 2 and 4b), familiarity and strength of association (Experiments 5 and 6), demand characteristics (Experiment 7), and positivity bias (Experiment 8). Introducing the DBM as a novel paradigm, we show that trust dominates mistrust and discuss the potential of this paradigm to determine dominant responses in manifold social domains. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)The world can be represented by two layers of information: How it appears on the outside (outward appearance) and what it is on the inside (inner state). To what extent an outward appearance is assumed to reflect the inner state is fundamental to social inference and judgments. Conceptualizing inference in terms of the relationship between the outward appearance and the inner state generates an integrative interpretation for a wide range of phenomena. We showed that Chinese were more likely than Euro-Canadians to make inference of inner state that deviated from outward appearance, whereas Euro-Canadians were more likely than Chinese to infer a convergence between outward appearance and inner state (Studies 1Å5). We observed these cross-cultural patterns in various contexts involving people or physical structures. Individual differences in correspondence bias or response bias did not explain these patterns. The lay belief that outward appearance can be misleading mediated the cultural effects (Study 4). To probe the underlying process, two additional experiments showed that highlighting the misleading nature of appearance, but not highlighting the power of the situation, reduced Americansí beliefs (Study 6) and inference (Study 7) that the outward appearance reflects the inner state. By focusing on the assumed relationship between the outward appearance and inner state, these findings provide a unique angle for understanding cross-cultural phenomena and have practical implications in daily life. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)In this study, we seek to understand how stress changes in dynamic social systems. Where prior work on the interpersonal transmission of stress focused on pairs of individuals and small groups, we adopt a network perspective to investigate how the distribution of stress in an individualís social environment influences their stress appraisal process. We conducted a 6-month longitudinal study of 315 early to midcareer adults in professional masterís programs as they encountered the stress of everyday academic life. We follow the dynamics of the participantsí networks and their concomitant stress at four key time points during those 6 months. We find that the perceived stress of oneís social contacts affects their experience of stress in this setting. Yet, not everyone is equally susceptible to this social influence. In particular, we find that social influence is substantially amplified under conditions of relative consensus among oneís social contacts. Also, a low level of neuroticism, a high level of conscientiousness, and a high level of internal control orientation help buffer the transmission of stress. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)In contrast to when members of marginalized groups choose to share their personal experiences on their own terms and in service of their own goals, when outside forces impose a focus on personal experiences in discussions of intergroup policies, there is instead the potential for disempowering implications: Being asked by someone else to approach intergroup issues through the specific lens of their personal experience may lead members of marginalized groups to sense that they are seen as the target of othersí harmful (e.g., discrimination) or benevolent (e.g., empathy) moral actions. According to research and theory on moral typecasting, perceiving a person as a target is fundamentally incompatible with perceiving them as an agent and thus is linked to lower perceived competence. Extending this theory to self-perceptions, seven studies provide evidence for anòimposed experience focus effect, whereby being prompted to talk about their personal experiences (vs. reasoning) in discussions of intergroup issues reduces racialized individualsí momentary feelings of power and power-relevant behaviors such as exerting social influence over White individualsí opinions. Perceptions of being viewed as less competent by others or seeing themselves as less competent in the moment were consistently implicated in this effect, which was not evident for White individuals or in discussions of general topics. Asking members of marginalized groups for their opinions in an open manner, or asking about their reasoning or personal firsthand knowledge, all appear to constitute means of learning about their perspective on intergroup issues in a more empowering way. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Leisure activities have been emphasized as an important predictor of well-being. However, little research has examined the effects of leisure activity enactment on well-being over time. Moreover, it is unknown which activities are most beneficial for whom. We integrate diverse theoretical accounts of personÅenvironment relations and propose a generic PersonalityÅActivityÅWell-Being (PAW) framework, which highlights different relations between personality traits, activities, and well-being. To investigate these relations, we used 11 annual waves from the Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) panel (totalòNò= 12,703 participants,òNò= 59,108 assessments), which included measures of the Big Five personality traits, 15 different leisure activities, and affective well-being and life satisfaction. Our preregistered multilevel models revealed three sets of findings. First, we observed on average small expected between-person associations between leisure activities and well-being (e.g., higher average levels of holidays, evening socializing, talking to close others, exercise, and cultural activities were associated with higher well-being). Annual within-person fluctuations in several leisure activities also predicted well-being in expected ways, but effect sizes were very small and varied strongly across participants. Second, personality traits were related to leisure activities in hypothesized ways, yielding on average small but also some moderate and large correlations. Third, Personality Trait ? Leisure Activity interactions were only evident on the between-person level, very small in size, and in the opposite direction of our expectations. Personality traits did not moderate well-being benefits from leisure within persons. We discuss the implications of our findings and sketch an agenda for future work. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Recent advances in natural language processing (NLP) have produced general models that can perform complex tasks such as summarizing long passages and translating across languages. Here, we introduce a method to extract adjective similarities from language models as done with survey-based ratings in traditional psycholexical studies but using millions of times more text in a natural setting. The correlational structure produced through this method is highly similar to that of self- and other-ratings of 435 English terms reported by Saucier and Goldberg (1996a). The first three unrotated factors produced using NLP are congruent with those in survey data, with coefficients of 0.89, 0.79, and 0.79. This structure is robust to many modeling decisions: adjective set, including those with 1,710 (Goldberg, 1982) and 18,000 English terms (Allport & Odbert, 1936); the query used to extract correlations; and language model. Notably, Neuroticism and Openness are only weakly and inconsistently recovered. This is a new source of signal that is closer to the original (semantic) vision of the lexical hypothesis. The method can be applied where surveys cannot: in dozens of languages simultaneously, with tens of thousands of items, on historical text, and at extremely large scale for little cost. The code is made public to facilitate reproduction and fast iteration in new directions of research. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Although humans are hard-wired to pursue sensory pleasure, they show considerable heterogeneity in their moral evaluations of sensory pleasure. In some societies, sensory pleasure is pursued without any moral inhibition, but in other societies, it is considered to be immoral and actively suppressed. This research investigates the moral motives behind the suppression of sensory consumption. Is the suppression of sensory consumption caused by the moral motive to promote social justice or the moral motive to promote social order? We test these two competing accounts through country-level archival data and seven preregistered controlled experiments. We find robust evidence that the social-order emphasizing binding moral foundations (authority, loyalty, and purity; Haidt, 2007) suppress sensory consumption. Consequently, individuals and societies that adhere to the binding values are less likely to consume sensory products such as alcohol, tobacco, soda, fragrances, and sex toys. These effects are mediated by prescriptive moral beliefs and feelings of shame. We also identify several moderators of the moral suppression of sensory consumption. Binding values do not suppress sensory consumption after moral licensing. The effects of binding values on sensory consumption attenuate when the products are framed as status-affirming. Finally, while binding values suppress sensory consumption that is personal, they do not suppress sensory consumption that is shared. Altogether, our findings show that social-order emphasizing moral beliefs in society can inhibit the pursuit of pleasure and change consumption patterns in the economy. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)Despite the worldwide increase in unpartnered individuals (i.e., singles), little research exists to provide a comprehensive understanding of the heterogeneity within this population. In the present research (Nò= 3,195), we drew on the fundamental social motives framework to provide a theory-based description and understanding of different ØtypesÆ of single individuals. Across two Western samples (primarily European and American) and one Korean sample (all collected during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020Å2021), we identified three groups of singles with relatively consistent motivational patterns: (a) singles with strong independence motives and little interest in affiliation, mating, or status (i.e., independent profile); (b) singles with great interest in self-protection as well as social connections and status (i.e., socially focused profile); and (c) singles with little interest in self-protection but moderate interest in affiliation (i.e., low safety focus profile). Notably, these profile features did not perfectly replicate in one smaller Western sample collected before the pandemic (particularly the low safety focus profile), highlighting the need to interpret the data with the historical background in mind. Across samples, the independence-oriented group of singles consistently reported greater satisfaction with singlehood compared to other groups. The three groups of singles also showed substantial differences in other affective and behavioral variables (e.g., how they spend their social time). These findings advance the growing body of research on singlehood by offering new theoretical perspectives on different types of singles. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2025 APA, all rights reserved)We form a first impression every time we meet someone unfamiliar to us. When this happens, we often have access to information about this personís appearance, voice and the first thing we learn about them is usually their name. Despite this, much of what we know about social evaluation processes has been almost exclusively based on facial information. Here, approximately 45,000 spontaneous first impression descriptors were sampled to identify the most common judgments we make when presented with information about someoneís face, voice, and name at the same time as well as when presented with information about their voice or name only. Ratings of these most common traits were then collected, and exploratory factor analysis was used to establish the underlying structure of multimodal, voice-, and name-based first impressions. Consistent with facial impression models, the two underlying dimensions of social evaluation, approachability and competence, emerged consistently regardless of the degree or type of identity information available, further adding to the existing evidence for their universal nature. Additional independent dimensions capturing confidence and pretentiousness were also found for multimodal impressions. These more social aspects of first impressions highlight further cultural learning routes to impression formation in addition to the evolutionary ones that have been the sole focus of existing work based on unimodal impressions from faces. Such findings draw attention to the need to further understand the mechanisms behind first impressions from different identity cues and, more importantly, how these cues are integrated together to form person first impressions. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Overconfidence is prevalent despite being linked to various negative outcomes for individuals, organizations, and even societies. To explain this puzzling phenomenon, C. Anderson, Brion, et al. (2012) proposed a status-enhancement theory of overconfidence: Expressing overconfidence helps individuals attain social status. In this registered report, we conducted a direct replication of Study 5 by C. Anderson, Brion, et al. (2012), who found that individual differences in desire for status were positively correlated with being overconfident about oneís task performance relative to others. We also tested the generalizability of the key relationship to a different measure of desire for status. Furthermore, we complemented traditional significance testing with equivalence testing and Bayesian analysis to test a set of null hypotheses in the original study. We found support for the status-enhancement hypothesis: Desire for status had a positive association with overconfidence using both the original measure of desire for status (? = 0.19, 95% CI [0.09, 0.28]) and the alternative measure (? = 0.31, 95% CI [0.22, 0.39]). A follow-up extension study aimed to test this relationship causally by manipulating the social context where status motives may be stronger (a competitive vs. cooperative context) and testing whether such an effect is driven by state-level desire for status. We did not find a direct causal effect of social context on overconfidence but an indirect association via state-level desire for status: A competitive (vs. cooperative) group context increased desire for status (? = 0.34, 95% CI [0.18, 0.51]), which in turn predicted greater overconfidence (? = 0.38, 95% CI [0.31, 0.46]). (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Structural racism has become a household term used in the media and in everyday conversations around diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives. Despite increased discussion of structural racism, people often struggle to understand how structural racism is perpetuated by individuals. We integrate research on moral psychology, social cognition, and intergroup relations to investigate whether structural explanations can lead to reduced perceptions of responsibility and punishment for managers who engage in discriminatory hiring decisions. A field study of health care system employees who perceived discriminatory hiring as originating from structural factors (vs. individual factors) were less likely to hold the hiring manager accountable (Study 1). Explaining discriminatory hiring to participants as due to structural factors (vs. a no-information control condition; Studies 2a, 2b, 2c, and 3) decreased desires to hold the hiring manager accountable. We found evidence that this lessened accountability was due to participantsí simultaneous perceptions that the hiring manager was less responsible for the lack of diversity and did not intend to discriminate under a structural racism explanation. However, when the relationship between individual and structural racism was explained, participants were more likely to hold perpetrators of discrimination accountable while allowing for crucial discussions around structural racism (Study 4). This work suggests that Americans may lack a deep understanding of the complexities surrounding structural racism, and that the connections between individuals and structural racism must be explained in order to motivate people to hold perpetrators of discrimination accountable. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Studies have shown that anomie, that is, the perception that a societyís leadership and social fabric are breaking down, is a central predictor of individualsí support for authoritarianism. However, causal evidence for this relationship is missing. Moreover, previous studies are ambiguous regarding the mediating mechanism and lack empirical tests for the same. Against this background, we derive a set of integrative hypotheses: First, we argue that perceptions of anomie lead to a perceived lack of political control. The repeated failure to exert control in the political sphere leads to feelings of uncertainty about the functioning and meaning of the political world. This uncertainty heightens peopleís susceptibility to authoritarianism because, we argue, the latter promises a sense of order, meaning, and the guidance of a Østrong leader.Æ We support our hypothesis in a large-scale field study with a representative sample of the German population (Nò= 1,504) while statistically ruling out alternative explanations. Adding internal validity, we provide causal evidence for each path in our sequential mediation hypothesis in three preregistered, controlled experiments (conducted in the United States, totalòNò= 846). Our insights may support policymakers in addressing the negative political consequences of anomie. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Existing research examining the creation of positive and prosocial interpersonal relations has established moral elevation as an approach-oriented emotion to be associated with a range of positive and prosocial outcomes. In this article and with the goal to identify emotional mechanism for improving intergroup relations in contexts of conflict, we examined the effects of moral elevation on enhancingòintergroupòrelations. Across four experimental studies (Ns = 1,131), conducted in four understudied countries directly affected or threatened by intergroup conflict, we demonstrated that induced moral elevation elicits important cognitive and emotional shifts toward adversarial groups, resulting in improved intergroup relations. Specifically, we show that inducing moral elevation through stories of outgroup moral exemplars (individuals who have risked their life to save the life of an outgroup member) enhanced perceptions of intergroup moral similarity and positive emotions toward the outgroup, consequently fostering greater approach and prosocial intergroup behaviors. This pattern proved consistent across four distinct contexts: nonconflict (Sweden), ongoing conflict (Pakistan), protracted conflict (Serbia), and postconflict (Bosnia and Herzegovina). This article advances existing theory on positive emotions by identifying a novel emotional mechanism conducive to improving intergroup relations in contexts of conflict and extends the impact of learning about exemplary moral behaviors performed by relevant others. Ultimately, this article underscores the relevance of moral elevation in mitigating intergroup conflicts using intergroup interventions. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Recent studies suggest a robust link between neuroticism and daily fluctuations in affective well-being. However, the specific affective processes that underlie this association remain unclear. This study examines four affective processes, event frequency/intensity, event appraisal, affective reactivity, and affective recovery, for both positive and negative events. To address these questions, we synthesized findings from five ambulatory assessment data sets (Nò= 1,118 participants,òNò= 96,699 observations). Using meta-analytic path analysis, we found that neuroticism was significantly associated with reporting more frequent and intense negative events, with increased negative affect reactivity to negative events, and with decreased recovery from negative events, which were also significantly associated with mean negative affect. As for positive events, their frequency and intensity were not significantly associated with neuroticism, but participants high in neuroticism responded more strongly to them. Using a sixth data set, we also showed that subjective appraisals of negative events were much more strongly associated with neuroticism and affective well-being than objective event occurrence. However, the operationalizations of these processes pose unique theoretical and empirical challenges that current operationalizations and data sets struggle to address. Thus, our findings provide evidence for the importance of these affective processes for both neuroticism and affective well-being in everyday life, while also highlighting the limitations of current operationalizations of these processes. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)This study examined the relationship between the theme of interdependence in the narratives of American adults with disabilities and psychological well-being across the shifting conditions of the first 3 years of the COVID-19 pandemic. In contrast to independence, interdependence has emerged as a focus of research about people with disabilities in both the interdisciplinary field of disability studies and in prior psychological research. In the present study, 108 participants completed questionnaires assessing well-being and responded to three narrative prompts once a year between 2020 and 2022, resulting in a total of 952 narratives. Narratives were reliably coded for the theme of interdependence in addition to the themes of independence, dependence, agency, submissiveness, communion, and disconnection. The results of multilevel modeling analyses indicated that the themes of interdependence and disconnection were most strongly associated with psychological well-being over the changing contexts of the study. Within-person analyses indicated that higher levels of interdependence were associated with lower levels of well-being in 2020 and with higher levels of well-being in 2022. These results suggest that the associations between narrative themes and well-being are contextualized and may demonstrate unusual associations during extreme events, like the COVID-19 pandemic. This study quantitatively establishes interdependence as an important narrative theme, one especially salient for people with disabilities. Additionally, the findings suggest that people with disabilities may offer alternative ways of narrating contemporary American identity that center interdependence, rather than independence, and challenge culturally shared notions about how to be American. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Age, cohort, and period effects are three ways to explain personality trait change over time. While past research mostly focused on age differences, showing relatively consistent patterns, evidence for cohort differences is more mixed, and period differences have hardly been examined. However, age, period, and cohort are exactly collinear (age = periodîcohort), such that estimates are likely confounded and always hinge on so-called identification assumptions. Identification assumptions shape substantive conclusions, and inappropriate or inconsistent strategies may explain past discrepant findings. To address this ageÅperiodÅcohort identification problem in personality change, we leveraged four large-scale (Ntotalò> 2 Mio) repeated cross-sectional data sets from 2003 to 2022. Our aims were to demonstrate how identification assumptions common in personality studies impact estimates for age, cohort, and period and to use weaker, substantively informed assumptions to narrow down the range of plausible solutions. Results showed that common identification strategies of constraining one temporal effect to zero can dramatically affect conclusionsîless for age-graded, but more for generational differences. Using weaker assumptions, our results indicated that all three factorsîage, cohort, and periodîlikely contribute to trait differences over time. Assuming age-graded change in a certain direction revealed cohort-related decreases in extraversion, openness, and neuroticism and increases in agreeableness, alongside period-related increases in extraversion, openness, and conscientiousness. This suggests that several previously assumed cohort differences may actually be driven by period effects, overlooked due to strong identification assumptions. Overall, highlighting the importance of appropriate identification strategies, our results offer unique insights into factors driving trait differences over time. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Personality psychology has long focused on between-person differences, often neglecting the dynamic, idiographic nature of personality as it unfolds in everyday life. This study introduces idiographic momentary profilesîperson-specific clusters of Big Five InventoryÅ2 facet statesîestimated using Gaussian finite mixture modeling. Drawing on experience-sampling data from two independent undergraduate samples (Nò= 245; 15,833 total surveys), we demonstrate that individuals exhibit unique, multivariate personality state patterns that vary across time and situations. Findings reveal that (a) most individuals express multiple distinct profiles, (b) profile distinctiveness reflects both level and pattern differences, and (c) situation characteristics (i.e., Situational Eight DIAMONDS items) predict momentary profile expression. These results challenge static trait and typological approaches by highlighting the complexity and contextuality of personality dynamics. Our findings underscore the value of idiographic methods in advancing personality theory and modeling, offering a foundation for capturing the full scope of personality variability in daily life.expression. These results challenge static trait and typological approaches by highlighting the complexity and contextuality of personality dynamics. Our findings underscore the value of idiographic methods in advancing personality theory and modeling, offering a foundation for capturing the full scope of personality variability in daily (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)People with opposing attitudes can learn from one another through civil discourse and debate. Yet, people routinely avoid discussing their differences of opinion, preferring instead to discuss their attitudes with like-minded others. We propose that people lack interest in discussing their differences of opinion, in part, because they expect such conversations are unlikely to change their own and othersí attitudes. Importantly, we find these expectations are systematically miscalibrated: Civil conversations reduce attitude polarization more than people anticipate. Participants with opposing attitudes toward cats and dogs (Study 1 and Supplemental Study S1), cancel culture (Studies 2 and 4), and Joe Bidenís performance as president (Study 5) underestimated how much their own and othersí attitudes would depolarize in spoken conversations. Moreover, participants retained somewhat less polarized attitudes 1 week later. Participants underestimated attitude change, because they misunderstood why their attitudes differed: Whereas participants inferred their attitudes differed, because they fundamentally disagreed; their attitudes actually differed, because they were focused on different aspects of these topics (Study 3). As such, having a conversation surfaced unexpected areas of agreement (Studies 2, 4, and 5). Importantly, participants became more interested in discussing their differences of opinion, when they were informed that their own and othersí attitudes might depolarize in a conversation (Study 6 and Supplemental Study S2). In total, the current work reveals that miscalibrated expectations can create an unnecessary barrier to civil discourse, leaving people with diverse points of view more divided, more polarized, and less informed than they otherwise could be. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)For decades, psychologists have appreciated that the average person sees themselves as better than average, particularly in moral domains. Although self-other comparisons permit establishing normative violations, they leave unanswered whether people see themselves and others positively or negatively in an absolute sense. The present research introduces a novel measure of moral thresholds to identify the behavioral tipping point that subjectively differentiates morality from immorality. Participants in two countries viewed themselves as clearly moral while viewing the other participants as falling short of the moral threshold (Study 1 and Supplemental Study A). Social targets of course take different forms. Study 2 (and Supplemental Study B) found that even when collectives (e.g., others in the study) were seen to fall short of moral thresholds, randomly selected individuals in those collectivesîwhether individuating information was offered about them or notîwere estimated to exceed moral thresholds. The relative positivity of behavioral estimates (self > individuals > collectives) could not be explained by perceiversí confidence in those assessments (Study 3). Studies 4aÅ4b completed an experimental causal chain to identify one reason individuals are judged more positively than collectives. People anticipated feeling worse if they were to be cynical about an individual (as opposed to a collective). This heightened anticipated negative experience was causally responsible for more positive behavioral forecasts. The moral threshold allows moral perception to join other domains (e.g., monetary outcomes, attitudes) in which identifying neutral reference points has been core to theoretical and empirical development. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Effort is commonly characterized as a negative, unpleasant experience. This research explores the extent to which individuals vary in whether they believe effort to be enjoyable or aversive and how this relates to a range of behavioral and physiological indicators of effort exertion. In five studies (Nò= 2,338), participants either completed an Effort Enjoyment Belief Scale or were experimentally led to believe that effort is enjoyable or aversive. Across our studies, descriptive analyses of the Effort Enjoyment Belief Scale revealed no general tendency among participants to perceive effort as aversive; instead, some participants tended to endorse a belief that effort is enjoyable. Both measured and manipulated effort enjoyment belief predicted difficulty selection on an arithmetic task. Further, the belief predicted effort exertion as assessed via cardiovascular measurements (?-adrenergic sympathetic activity) and was associated with high school grades and subjective evaluation of academic success at university. These results imply that the subjective cost or value of effort may be affected by (social) learning experiences, shaping individualsí effort enjoyment belief and, in turn, their tendency to approach or avoid demanding tasks and the exertion of effort. Thus, when modeling behavior as the result of a costÅbenefit analysis, effort may not contribute exclusively to the costs but also add value to a course of action, depending on individualsí effort enjoyment belief. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Attachment theory (Bowlby, 1973, 1980, 1969/1982) suggests that early interpersonal experiences lay the foundation for the ways people think, feel, and behave in close relationships throughout life. The present study examined this fundamental assumption, analyzing longitudinal data collected from 705 participants and their families over 3 decades, from the time participants were infants until they were approximately 30 years old (Mageò= 28.6,òSDò= 1.2; 78.7% White, non-Hispanic, 53.6% female, 46.4% male). We examined the associations between early levels and growth (or changes) in the quality of peopleís close relationships during childhoodîincluding with their parents, friends, peers, and romantic partnersîand their attachment orientations in adulthood. The findings suggest that early experiences with caregivers play a foundational and enduring role in peopleís attachment-related functioning: Early levels of motherÅchild relationship quality predicted individual differences inògeneralòattachment anxiety and avoidance in adulthood, as well as adultsíòrelationship-specificòattachment orientations in each of their close relationships, including with their mothers, fathers, romantic partners, and best friends (medianòR? = 3% for attachment anxiety and avoidance across relationship domains). Early levels and growth in the quality of peopleís friendships during childhood also predicted general attachment orientations in adulthood (R?attachment anxietyò= 2%;òR?avoidanceò= 9%) and played a particularly important role in guiding the ways adults tended to think, feel, and behave in their friendships and romantic relationships (R?attachment anxietyò= 4%;òR?avoidanceò= 10%Å11%). (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Decades of research indicate that growth versus fixed mindsets can influence important outcomes. Some, however, have recently questioned this conclusion, documenting small to nonexistent effects. Inspired by attitudes research, we propose that some growth mindsets may be strongerîmore impactfulîthan others. Specifically, this work examines whether mindsets held with higher certainty are more likely to influence responses. A field study, a high-powered preregistered experiment, and an integrative data analysis test whether mindset certainty influences interest and engagement in organizations that endorse fixed versus growth mindsets. These studies found that when students held their mindsets with high levels of certainty, their personal mindset beliefs were highly predictive of their relative interest in growth versus fixed classrooms, but when they held their mindsets with less certainty, their personal mindsets did not predict relative interest in growth versus fixed classrooms in this same manner. Broadly, these studies support that mindsets vary in strength, which should encourage researchers to identify ØwhenÆ rather than ØwhetherÆ growth mindsets predict outcomes. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)IndividualismÅcollectivism (I-C), the most widely researched cultural dimension, is often equated with Hofstedeís pioneering nation scores. Concerns are growing about these scoresí validity, but subsequent research has not produced a widely accepted alternative. Here, we offer a refined theoretical conceptualization of I-C, we systematically reevaluate the validity of Hofstedeís I-C scores, and we report the development and validation of a new I-C index, covering 102 countries/territories inhabited by an estimated 88% of the worldís population. In Study 1, we document the inferior convergent and nomological validity of Hofstedeís I-C index, compared to subsequent measures. Hofstedeís scores substantially overestimate individualism in English-speaking countries and collectivism in East Asian societies, which we demonstrate can considerably bias research findings. In Study 2, we develop an authoritative, theory-driven I-C index, using nationally representative data from the World Values Survey and European Values Study, which shows excellent internal coherence, temporal stability, and strong evidence of convergent, discriminant, and nomological validity. Theorized facets of individualismîfreedom (vs. conformity), tolerance of differences (vs. exclusion), and equality (vs. discrimination)îform a coherent and stable dimension at the cultural level of analysis. Individualism is higher in societies with better existential security (e.g., socioeconomic development, stable institutions) and is not associated with greater selfishness, anomie, or competitive beliefs and values. Relying on outdated indices may perpetuate cultural stereotypes and underpin flawed theorizing. Scholars should use theoretically appropriate and up-to-date measures of societal culture when seeking to understand global variation in human psychological functioning. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Life satisfaction is an important component of well-being to consider in relation to cognitive function due to its modifiability, potential utility in public health policy, and associations with cognitive health outcomes. However, little is known about the directionality of the association between life satisfaction and cognitive function, and past longitudinal work has yielded mixed findings. Using a coordinated data analytic approach, the current research used data from five longitudinal studies with at least three co-occurring waves of life satisfaction and cognitive function assessments, including over 60,000 individuals aged 50 years and older across multiple countries. Bivariate latent growth curve models and random intercept cross-lagged panel models were used to model between- and within-person associations and to test the potentially bidirectional association between life satisfaction and cognitive function over time. Findings revealed modest between- and within-person associations between life satisfaction and cognitive function. At the between-person level, individuals with higher life satisfaction also had higher cognitive function, and the two constructs changed together across time. However, initial levels of one did not predict long-term change trajectories in the other. At the within-person level, declines in life satisfaction predicted subsequent declines in cognitive function, and vice versa. The current research advances our understanding of the relationship between life satisfaction and cognitive function, suggesting that these constructs change together in the long term and predict changes in each other in the short term. Findings provide observational evidence for the potential utility of life satisfaction in promoting healthy cognitive aging. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Becoming a parent is a major life event associated with changes in psychological well-being. Existing research has often focused on the long-term development of trait well-being, leaving several gaps unaddressed. The current preregistered study employed three waves of intensive longitudinal data, including 7-day experience sampling data per wave, to investigate psychological well-being trajectories across the transition to motherhood. This approach provides novel, detailed insights into the timing of well-being changes (beyond traditional annual assessments), explores developments in different change indicators (mean-level, intraindividual variability, and individual differences), and various well-being components (affective, cognitive, and meaning in life) during this critical life transition. Following 161 first-time Dutch mothers from 20 weeks of pregnancy to 6 months postpartum, we observed increases in positive affect and meaning in life, along with decreases in life and relationship satisfaction that occurred between pregnancy and 2Å3 months postpartum, with no significant changes afterward. In contrast, no significant changes in intraindividual variability in well-being (i.e., well-being fluctuations from moment to moment and day to day) were observed throughout the transition. There were both similarities and differences between the trajectories of trait and mean-state measures of different well-being outcomes, and additional exploratory analyses highlighted how various daily predictors (e.g., sleep quality, infant crying) became more (or less) important for mothersí well-being as they moved across the transition. The present study contributed to a better understanding of how the changes in a broad range of well-being components and other parameters unfold across the transition to motherhood. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)Understanding the nature of the values and superordinate goals is both fascinating and highly consequential. Yet, existing taxonomies diverge in numerous respects, creating a barrier to scientific progress. To come to a fuller understanding, we conducted an integrated empirical analysis. We systematically gathered value-descriptive phrases from numerous past influential measures and item sets, standardized them to a common format, and eliminated redundancies, resulting in 359 items. We then asked two large samples of American adults to rate their commitment to these values, including a convenience sample (nò= 312) and census-matched sample (nò= 506). Analyses indicated that their structure can be parsimoniously described in terms of five broad domains: individual mastery, social rank, interpersonal relatedness, cultural conventionality, and universal justice. This solution was robust across samples and across many variations in analytic technique. Further analyses suggested that 13 more specific facets can be located within and between these domains, providing a more detailed description. This provides an organizing framework that should allow researchers examining different theories to more easily compare their findings. Further research is certainly needed to examine the generalizability of this structure across cultures. Nonetheless, the current investigation provides an important initial step by providing an integrated description of the structure of values in a Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic cultural context from which many prior models originated. (PsycInfo Database Record (c) 2026 APA, all rights reserved)